My concept of learning extends beyond memorizing equations and values.  Mastery of technical material is demonstrated by the application of the tools on a new, never-before seen problem.  More than the "plug and chug" approach that I became so used to during my undergraduate career, real mastery is the ability to see connections between different types of problems and apply tools learned in the context of one domain to another.  For instance, differential equations are common occurrences in engineering applications, it is important to see the similarities in structure between equations even when applied to different problems: the solution to a time varying system or as a tool to solve an optimization problem.  Mastery of high level engineering tools leads to mastery of the basics, not for the sake of mastering the basics as individual islands of knowledge, but as necessary building blocks to a larger whole.

The best experience I had as a student was in a class in which the lectures felt more like story time than lectures.  The content was detailed and complete, but the instructor successfully wove in personal stories and anecdotes to explain how he came to the conclusions he was sharing.  I value this approach as it connects the instructor to the content on a personal level, which in turn makes it easier for students to connect and engage with the material. My appreciation for the topic (Greek History) was greatly increased due to the personal engagement shown by the instructor.  My goal is to convey a similar engagement to my own material. It will be challenging to do this with technical topics, but I believe it is possible, and where I can't include my personal experiences I'd like to draw on the lives and experiences of the people who laid the groundwork for the different theories and techniques that are covered in an engineering curriculum.  This will make the subject itself more personal, increasing the likelihood that students can connect on a personal level.

My goals for the students are to disconnect them from the mindset of learning a list of facts and equations and worrying if they know all "the right" equations for the exam.  I'd like them to see engineering in the larger context as a set of tools that are used to solve problems and understand the importance of thinking of all the different tools as pieces that can all work in tandem, rather than discrete bits of knowledge, each for one type of problem.

I strive to include more group discussion in the classroom.  My experience in the undergraduate engineering curriculum consisted of too much lecturing from prepared slides.  This format is ideal for some material, but not all.  It certainly isn't ideal for fostering the critical thinking skills necessary for determining which tools are best suited for what type of problem.  In my experience grading I have often seen many different solutions to the same problem, all reaching the correct conclusion.  My initial reaction when seeing a solution different from my own was that it wasn't the "best" solution, it wasn't as elegant, or as succinct as it could be.  That mindset evolved out of years of only seeing a single "correct" solution to a problem, usually the professors.  I realized that the concept of "best" solution isn't always well defined, and that a conversation as to what makes a good solution is a helpful one to have, but is one that rarely took place in my own education.  I'd like to foster this conversation in my own classroom by sharing the different solutions with the entire class after each assignment and generating a discussion about them.  Trough this I hope that students will grow to look at any solution with an objective eye, feel more confident about calling out any errors in a solution presented by an instructor, and recognize their own bias in favoring a solution they came up with compared to some one else.

Using case studies can be an excellent companion to problem-based learning, but I like to try and find case studies that are as relevant to students as possible.  I really liked the example that a West Virginia high school set by using a minor collision in the school parking lot as a starting point to explore topics such as geometry, public policy, traffic design and local law.  It may not always be feasible to find an example close by that will inspire exploration of all the content that must be covered, but with a little effort on the part of the instructor, we could be doing a lot more than we are now.

I try to be accessible to students, I would like to be seen as inviting to talk to and safe to disagree with.  I am not very comfortable with a strong sense of hierarchy and distance between student and instructor, my natural tendency is to want to treat my students as colleagues, and hope that they see me as more of a colleague than an instructor.  Of course, certain obligations as instructor prevent me from fully embracing the colleague relationship: namely, I am responsible for evaluating their progress and assigning grades which does by definition dictate a power difference between instructor and student.  How grades are assigned and how work is evaluated can go a long way into reducing many negative implications of this power differential.

Providing high quality assessment is an increasing challenge in an environment of ever increasing class size and extraneous faculty time commitments.  I've been lucky in my experiences thus far to have run only medium sized classes, and so have usually been able to provide more descriptive and individual feedback that I'd like, however I recognize that this is not always possible. Last semester I started implementing more peer-feedback in my class of about 60 students.  After a number of specific assignments I would ask students to review the work submitted by one of their colleagues, the original work, peer assessment and any revisions were then submitted to me.  The peer assessments helped my own assessment by providing starting points to investigate in greater detail, and in many cases catching subtle bits of a solution that I probably would have missed without the hints.  I also know from my own experiences that knowledge that a peer will be looking at my work tends to motivate me to put my best effort into completing an assignment, rather than if I knew only the instructor would be evaluating it.  More importantly, I factored in any revisions made after receiving peer review to the final grade.  While the revised work is evaluated as a smaller percentage than the original, so as to encourage the best effort the first time around, I hope this reduces the fear and stress I know I experienced when submitting assignments that I may have made one careless mistake with devastating consequences to a final grade.

I believe some assessment on some tools-based skills can be helpful and so while ideally limited to necessity, so called "academic exercises" probably should not be eliminated entirely, however, I want to emphasize problem-based problem solving as it provides motivation for learnign the basetools, and I find it results in greater retention of learned skills as well as improving confedence in solving original problems that don't fit the typical academic mold of those used in most engineering text books.

I really like [whosits] suggestion of making a point to regularly take a new out-of-field course, and I plan to take one every year, if possible.  In addition to exposing myself to a variety of teachign styles, I am sure to come accross possible connections and applications to my own field of study (for example, I already had such an experience while sitting in on a Public Planning and Policy class and noticed a paralell between a specific public planning policy and an optimal control algorithm I had been studying for a robotic navigation problem).
